Ajax World NY Apr 1-3 http://www.riaconference.com/general/papers.htm
ILC: A web-based ajax visual programming language Using Lisp
on the server and js on the client firefox and lispscript->javascript
translation implementing a lisp like language (BBL) Lisp gives us
lispscript macrofication over Javascript, and lisp gives us the
ability to write an entire new compiled programming language easily
and to provide a uniform template model for the language that's used
directly by the lispscript/javascript interface builder. Example of
both the template that specify the languge, and lispscript are given
and some pretty picture of the result. The result is an easily
extensible -- in fact, it's extendible to other lisp-based programming
languages, and self extensible by virtue of the ability to define
functions which then becomes a part of the user's vpl. Diriviate of
biobike/biolingua bioinfoamticas cyanobacteria knowledgebase blah lbah
lbah. knowos... multi-headed multi-threaded (MHMT) paradigm. structred
editor with structured, context sensitive operations; division of
labor whgere the server does the semantics and the clients moves boxes
around.

ILC: A Lisp-like web-based ajax visual programming language Using Lisp
on the server and js on the client firefox and lispscript->javascript
translation implementing a lisp like language (BBL) Lisp gives us
lispscript macrofication over Javascript, and lisp gives us the
ability to write an entire new compiled programming language easily
and to provide a uniform template model for the language that's used
directly by the lispscript/javascript interface builder. Example of
both the template that specify the languge, and lispscript are given
and some pretty picture of the result. The result is an easily
extensible -- in fact, it's extendible to other lisp-based programming
languages, and self extensible by virtue of the ability to define
functions which then becomes a part of the user's vpl. Diriviate of
biobike/biolingua bioinfoamticas cyanobacteria knowledgebase blah lbah
lbah. knowos... multi-headed multi-threaded (MHMT) paradigm. structred
editor with structured, context sensitive operations; division of
labor whgere the server does the semantics and the clients moves boxes
around. subtext: how bbl emasculates and extends lisp to provide a
simpler language that can support the biological computing and VPL ...
flags, token args, automapping

CHI
VL/HCC -- boxes to bits in bioinformatics

Bioinformatics: starts from the same premises as the biobike paper.
here the focus is BBL and its visual rep. and how it helps biologists
solve proggramming problem; all the functions are reachable and type
constrained with biological knowledge all opertions are presented,
with suitable help and types. color coded; makes the frame system
automaticallt available, lists are lists {}, auto mapcaring,
generalized areference (ref) in biologist-readable format [] history
and other biobike stuff MHMT; englishy syntax (candy grammar) live
tutorials model -- need biological examples -- full-fetured stepping
stone -- creates bbl fully compiled by virtue of translating to lisp
boxes to bits - in theory access tyo all the bio objects via menus or
direec entry subtext: how bbl emasculates and extends lisp to provide
a simpler language that can support the biological computing and VPL


